Vector Database Engine Overview [HZAI-77] (#1134)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/architecture/pages/vector-search-overview.adoc

- `partitionLimit * partitionCount >= topK`, `partitionLimit &lt;= topK`
- `memberLimit * memberCount >= topK`, `memberLimit &lt;= topK`

By default `partitionLimit` and `memberLimit` are equal to `topK` which satisfies the above inequalities but causes processing of much more results than the requested `topK`.
This improves the overall quality of the results but can have a significant performance overhead because more entries are fetched from each partition of the index and sent between the members.

NOTE: Consider tuning `partitionLimit` based on quality and latency requirements. It should be adjusted alongside number of partitions.
`memberLimit` is less critical for overall behavior if there are only a few members.

=== Single-stage search

A simplified search algorithm exists which does not perform intermediate aggregation of results on member level.
It is used if the cluster has only a single member. It can be also enabled using search hint in other cases.

In this case search request is executed in parallel on all partitions (on their owners)

> and partition results are aggregated directly to produce the final result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and partition results are aggregated directly on the coordinator member to produce the final result.
```

=== Partitioning and Replication

Each collection is partitioned and replicated based on the system's general partitioning rules. Data partitioning is carried out using the collection key.

NOTE: For more details about Hazelcast partitioning, please refer to the xref:data-partitioning.adoc[Data Partitioning and Replication].

NOTE: Version 5.5/beta supports partitioning and migration but does not include support for the backup process.

=== Data store
Hazelcast stores data in-memory (RAM) for faster access. Presently, the only available data storage option is the JVM heap store.

=== Fault Tolerance
Hazelcast distributes storage data across all cluster members.
In the event of a graceful shutdown, the data will be migrated to remaining active members.
In version 5.5, there is no automatic data restoration in the event of an unexpected member loss.

== Partitioned similarity search

Vector indexes are partitioned, so when you execute similarity search all partitions need to be searched and partial results aggregated.

> It is important to understand the impact of that process on search performance and recall.

Reviewer 2: it is complicated, described somewhat in "Partition count impact" section, but there is more regarding latency.
we are in beta, it is too early to prepare advanced calculation, but I can make an example of how many results are processed at each stage

> It is important to understand the impact of that process on search performance and recall.

Reviewer 2: example diagrams: https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/1134/commits/ab6ebe73d660ed6f882aa4f20d51befbda517e10

> It is important to understand the impact of that process on search performance and recall.

Reviewer 2: I described impact and updated the diagrams: https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/1134/commits/20208a85980f7819230a2ed1850ce1a2d8fb5272

=== Two-stage search

The default search algorithm is two-stage search which works as follows:

1. Member that received the query is a coordinator.
2. Coordinator fans out search request to each member (including self). Each member is tasked with returning results from partitions it owns.
3. Each member executes search on owned partitions in parallel and aggregates the partition results.
4. Partially aggregated results are returned to coordinator.
5. Coordinator aggregates partial results and generates final results.
   If necessary, searches on some partitions can be retried individually, for example in case of migrations, members leaving the cluster or other errors.

Aggregation at each stage is done based on score and only the best results are kept.

There are 2 important parameters in this search algorithm that determine amount of data sent between the members and quality of the final result:

- `partitionLimit` - number of search results obtained from each partition
- `memberLimit` - number of search results returned from member to coordinator

> If `topK` denotes number of entries requested, then the following should hold in order for the system to be able to return enough results:

Reviewer 3: Not sure I have completely understood this, if not, let me know and we can improve.

> If `topK` denotes number of entries requested, then the following should hold in order for the system to be able to return enough results:

Reviewer 2: I wanted to formulate it like a mathematical theorem/axiom/precondition. The conditions specified below are required for a reasonable search request

- `partitionLimit * partitionCount >= topK`, `partitionLimit &lt;= topK`
- `memberLimit * memberCount >= topK`, `memberLimit &lt;= topK`

> By default `partitionLimit` and `memberLimit` are equal to `topK` which satisfies the above inequalities but causes processing of much more results than the requested `topK`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, `partitionLimit` and `memberLimit` are equal to `topK`. While this satisfies the inequalities given above, it can result in the processing of more results than requested.
```

This improves the overall quality of the results but can have a significant performance overhead because more entries are fetched from each partition of the index and sent between the members.

> NOTE: Consider tuning `partitionLimit` based on quality and latency requirements. It should be adjusted alongside number of partitions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: Consider tuning `partitionLimit` based on quality and latency requirements. Always consider the number of partitions when making adjustments.
```

Reviewer 2: I meant than if `partitionLimit` and partition count should be tuned together, partition count not only should be considered but also changed (however there are more factors impacting partition count described in separate section)

Reviewer 3: @k-jamroz amended and added reference to the partition count section. WDYT?

`memberLimit` is less critical for overall behavior if there are only a few members.

=== Single-stage search

> A simplified search algorithm exists which does not perform intermediate aggregation of results on member level.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A simplified search algorithm can be used, which does not perform intermediate aggregation of results at member level.
```

> It is used if the cluster has only a single member. It can be also enabled using search hint in other cases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is used where the cluster has only a single member, or can be enabled using search hint.
```

> In this case search request is executed in parallel on all partitions (on their owners)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A single-stage search request is executed in parallel on all partitions (on their owners)
```

and partition results are aggregated directly on the coordinator member to produce the final result.

> This search algorithm has `partitionLimit` parameter which behaves in the same way as for two-stage search.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This search algorithm uses the `partitionLimit` parameter, which behaves in the same way as for two-stage search.
```

== Partition count impact

> Number of partitions has big impact on the performance of the vector collection. There are numerous conflicting factors impacting selection of optimal partition count:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The number of partitions has a big impact on the performance of the vector collection. Other conflicting factors that can impact the selection of an optimal partition count including the following:
```

Reviewer 2: those are not "other factors", these are _the_ factors :)

Reviewer 3: Note amended, @k-jamroz WDYT?

> - *data ingestion*: more partitions give better parallelism, up to some point, around total number of partition threads in the cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- *data ingestion*: a greater number of partitions results in improved parallelism, up to around the total number of partition threads in the cluster.
```

>   Having more partitions than that will not improve ingestion speed significantly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  After this point, more partitions will not significantly improve ingestion speed.
```

> - *similarity search*: fewer partitions in general results in better search performance and latency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- *similarity search*: in general, having fewer partitions results in better search performance and reduced latency.
```

  However, the impact on quality/recall is complicated and depends also on `partitionLimit`.

> - *migration*: very big partitions (in terms of memory size) should be avoided. Note that both metadata, vectors and vector index internal representation count.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- *migration*: avoid partitions with a large memory size., including metadata, vectors and vector index internal representation.
```

>   Current general recommendation for partition size is around 50-100MB per partition, which results in fast migrations and small pressure on heap during migration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  In general, the recommendation is for a partition size of around 50-100MB per partition, which results in fast migrations and small pressure on heap during migration.
```

>   However, for vector search use case the partition size may be increased above that limit provided that there is enough heap for migrations (see below).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  However, for vector search, the partition size can be increased above that general recommendation provided that there is enough heap memory for migrations (see below).
```

- *other data structures*: number of partitions is a cluster-wide setting shared by all data structures. If the needs are vastly different, you might consider creating separate clusters.

> NOTE: It is not possible to change number of partitions for an existing cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: It is not possible to change the number of partitions for an existing cluster.
```

> WARNING: Default value of 271 partitions may result in inefficient vector similarity search.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[WARNING]
====
* The default value of 271 partitions can result in inefficient vector similarity searches.
We recommend that you tune the number of partitions for use in clusters with vector collections.

* The entire collection partition is migrated simultaneously and cannot be chunked.
If using partitions that are larger than the recommended size, ensure that you have sufficient heap memory to run migrations. The amount of heap memory required is approximately the size of the vector collection partition multiplied by the number of parallel migrations.
To decrease pressure on heap memory, you can decrease the number of parallel migrations using `hazelcast.partition.max.parallel.migrations` and `hazelcast.partition.max.parallel.replications`.
====
```

Reviewer 3: They remain two warnings in the suggested change, it is just that they display in a single box. Multiple warnings one after the other are not a good look; beta or otherwise.

I have added a feed-in line to the two warnings, and change the list to a numbered list to highlight that there are two separate things to note.

I have also made it a CAUTION; here's the difference:

- A Caution advises readers to be careful
- A Warning inform readers of danger, harm, or consequences that exist

@k-jamroz WDYT?

Reviewer 2: `CAUTION` is fine

> The entire collection partition is migrated simultaneously and cannot be chunked.

chunked migration is enabled by `hazelcast.partition.migration.chunks.enabled` and is enabled by default. We do not have a lot of docs about it except in https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/5.4/system-properties. Chunked migration is implemented eg. for IMaps but is not yet implemented for Vector Collections, but hopefully will be later.

Vector collection currently supports fragmented migration (`hazelcast.partition.migration.fragments.enabled`), which means that each collection is migrated in separate packet/message.

So maybe we can use wording similar to system properties docs:

> The entire collection partition is migrated in one big chunk

Reviewer 3: How about:

The entire collection partition is migrated as a single chunk

?

> Tuning the number of partitions for use in clusters with vector collections is highly recommended.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> WARNING: In current version chunked migration of vector collections is not implemented, entire collection partition is migrated at once.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> When using larger than recommended partitions ensure that you have enough heap to execute migrations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> (approximately size of vector collection partition times number of parallel migrations).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> It may be helpful to decrease number of parallel migrations (`hazelcast.partition.max.parallel.migrations` and `hazelcast.partition.max.parallel.replications`) to decrease the heap pressure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

= VectorCollection data structure design
:description: A Hazelcast vector database engine is a specialized type of database, which is optimized for storing, searching, and managing vector embeddings and additional metadata. You can include values in the metadata to provide filtering, additional processing, or analysis of vectors.
:page-enterprise: true
:page-beta: true

{description}

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

For further information on the design of the Vector Collection data structure, see xref:data-structures:vector-collections.adoc[].
```

Reviewer 3: @shultseva this is the suggested x-ref to tie the topics together (see other comment on nav file)

> = Vector Database Engine

Reviewer 2: add this page to navigation

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/1134/commits/1ee1b9a5612fed748bcd23d4787699d4d64ba8c4

> = Vector Database Engine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= VectorCollection data structure design
```

I would avoid the term database because it creates expectations that our AP infrastructure doesn't supply.

:page-enterprise: true
:page-beta: true

== Intro

> A Hazelcast vector database engine is a specialized type of database optimized for storing, searching, and managing vector embeddings along with additional metadata. The metadata can include any values that are useful for further processing or analyzing vectors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Hazelcast vector database engine is a specialized type of database optimized for storing, searching, and managing vector embeddings along with additional metadata. The metadata can include any values that are useful for filtering or further processing or analyzing vectors.
```

== Architecture
The high-level diagram of the main components:

image:vector-search-components.png[The high-level diagram of the main components]

Main components of the system:

* *Clients*: methods and libraries for connecting and working with the vector database. Currently, two language clients are available: Java and Python.

* *Collections*: a set consisting of one or several indexes and a one metadata storage.
For further information about collection, please refer to the xref:data-structures:vector-collections.adoc[Vector Collection documentation].

* *Indexes*: Named sets of vectors. Vectors within the same index must have the same dimensions and be compared using the same metric. See <<index, Index Overview>>.

> * *Metadata storage*: key-value storage for storing metadata values. The key and value can be any objects, for example JSON or unstructured text.

Reviewer 2: > for example JSON or unstructured text

maybe worth mentioning Compact-serialized and java-serialized POJOs as well?

Reviewer: You could add a link to the "Serializing Objects and Classes" section in documentation so users can see all available options.

Author: 1017e93bfab39a2ae81d97df70cd419e73915d12

Vector collection overview:

image:vector-collection.png[Vector collection overview]

> The linkage between the vector and the method is established through a user-defined key assigned during the addition of the vector to the collection. Each key can correspond to exactly one vector from each index.

Reviewer 2: > linkage between the vector and the method

method? did you mean metadata?

Author: 1017e93bfab39a2ae81d97df70cd419e73915d12

=== Index

Essentially, each index serves as a distinct vector space.
In terms of storage, the index is a graph where each node represents a vector, and the edges are organized to optimize search efficiency.

> The index is built based on a library https://github.com/jbellis/jvector[JVector] that implements https://github.com/Microsoft/DiskANN[DiskANN] algorithm for similarity search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The index is built based on https://github.com/jbellis/jvector[JVector] library that implements https://github.com/Microsoft/DiskANN[DiskANN] algorithm for similarity search.
```

=== Partitioning and Replication

> Each collection is partitioned and replicated based on the system's general partitioning rules. Data partitioning is carried out using the collection key.

Reviewer 2: some 5.5/beta disclaimer should be here: partition yes, migration yes, backups no

Author: 1017e93bfab39a2ae81d97df70cd419e73915d12

NOTE: For more details about Hazelcast partitioning, please refer to the xref:data-partitioning.adoc[Data Partitioning and Replication].

=== Data store
Hazelcast stores data in-memory (RAM) for faster access. Presently, the only available data storage option is the JVM heap store.

=== Fault Tolerance

> Hazelcast distributes storage data across all cluster members, ensuring that if a member is lost, Hazelcast can restore the data from replicas.

Reviewer 2: not in 5.5 for vector collection

Author: rewrited
1017e93bfab39a2ae81d97df70cd419e73915d12
